# Tutorial

In this tutorial we will make our first Deptool deployment against a single
host. Before we start, follow the [build instructions](building.md) to build
a static binary; prebuilt binaries are not yet available.

## Prerequisites

In this tutorial we are going to manage a host named `webserver`. This host must
be reachable via <abbr>SSH</abbr> — either because it has a <abbr>DNS</abbr>
name, or because it’s defined in your `~/.ssh/config`. To manage it, Deptool
needs root access on this host. If root <abbr>SSH</abbr> is allowed, you can add
a [`User`][man-user] line in your `~/.ssh/config`. Alternatively, if your
default user is allowed to use passwordless sudo, that also works. Confirm that
this works:

    $ ssh webserver 'sudo cat /etc/hostname'
    webserver

[man-user]: https://man.archlinux.org/man/ssh_config.5#User

## Preparing a store

Deptool uses a _store_ to track its deployment history and cluster state. Under
the hood the store is a bare Git repository, by default located at `.deptool`.
To populate the store, we need a directory to hold the cluster configuration:
the _config tree_. This directory is named after the cluster, and it lives next
to the store.[^1] Let’s create a cluster named `prod`:

    $ deptool init prod
    Initialized store at '.deptool'.
    Created cluster directory 'prod' and recorded it as the default.

In the cluster directory, we create one directory per target host:

    $ mkdir prod/webserver

On a host, Deptool manages _apps_. Let's say we want to manage a configuration
file `Caddyfile`, for an app named `caddy`. Then we’d set up the file tree like
so:

    prod
    └── webserver
        └── caddy
            └── Caddyfile

Let’s create it:

    $ mkdir prod/webserver/caddy
    $ vim prod/webserver/caddy/Caddyfile

Upon deploy, Deptool will commit this directory tree to its store.

[^1]: The store is located outside of the config directory `prod`, so that you
      can easily delete the entire config directory. This is because in larger
      cluster configurations, this tree is supposed to be _generated_ rather
      than written by hand, and if we can delete and regenerate the config
      directory, then we can’t accidentally forget to delete files that are no
      longer generated by the generator.

## Deploying

Let’s deploy this to our 1-host cluster!

    $ deptool deploy
    webserver
        add caddy
            + Caddyfile

    Auto-rollback if deploy fails.
    Apply to 1 host in cluster 'prod'? [y/N/d]

Before even connecting to a host, Deptool shows us the _plan_. In this case, the
plan is to add a new app `caddy` on host `webserver`, which contains a new file
`Caddyfile`. Press `d` to see the full diff, and then `y` to deploy.

Because we haven’t connected to this host before, the first thing Deptool will
do is copy the `deptool` binary to the host into `/var/lib/deptool/bin`. Then
it executes `deptool agent` on the remote host over an <abbr>SSH</abbr> connection.
The agent is short-lived: it runs only during our deployment. It provides a
channel through which `deptool deploy` can send data and commands to the host
over a single <abbr>SSH</abbr> connection. If the latency to the host is not too
bad, this should all happen within a second:


    Apply to 1 host in cluster 'prod'? [y/N/d] y

      webserver: done

    Changes deployed successfully to 1 host in 0.78s.

This created a directory `/var/lib/deptool` on the target host:

    root@webserver ~ $ tree /var/lib/deptool
    /var/lib/deptool
    ├── apps
    │   └── caddy
    │       ├── 8bb051121b
    │       │   └── Caddyfile
    │       └── current -> 8bb051121b
    ├── bin
    │   └── deptool-0.1.0-cd51d88f1b
    └── store
        ├── HEAD
        ├── objects
        └── ...

 * `apps/caddy` contains a directory named after the commit that Deptool created
   for this deployment. It contains the `Caddyfile` that we wanted to deploy.
 * `apps/caddy/current` is a symlink to that directory.
 * `bin` contains a binary `deptool` named after the version and the commit it
   was built from.[^2]
 * `store` contains a bare Git repository which contains a copy of the
   local store.

[^2]: This ensures that the driver side and agent side — `deptool deploy` which
      runs on the operator machine, and `deptool agent` which runs on the
      target host — run exactly the same binary, so there are never any
      compatibility issues with the wire protocol. Deptool automatically deletes
      older versions from this directory to prevent it from filling up the disk.

That’s our first deployment completed! The Caddyfile is now managed by Deptool,
and we can find the latest version at `/var/lib/deptool/apps/caddy/current/Caddyfile`.

## Making changes

Back on the operator machine, let’s make a change to our Caddyfile and deploy
again:

    $ vim prod/webserver/caddy/Caddyfile
    $ deptool deploy
    webserver
        update caddy
            ~ Caddyfile
    
    Auto-rollback if deploy fails.
    Apply to 1 host in cluster 'prod'? [y/N/d]

When we deploy the new configuration, Deptool indicates that the file
`Caddyfile`, part of app `caddy` on host `webserver`, has changes. Press `d`
to diff the contents of Caddyfile, `y` to deploy.

    Apply to 1 host in cluster 'prod'? [y/N/d] y
    
      webserver: done

    Changes deployed successfully to 1 host in 0.67s.

On the target host, the `caddy` directory has changed:

    root@webserver ~ $ tree /var/lib/deptool/apps/caddy
    /var/lib/deptool/apps/caddy
    ├── 8bb051121b
    │   └── Caddyfile
    ├── e87dcde346
    │   └── Caddyfile
    ├── current -> e87dcde346
    └── previous -> 8bb051121b

The `current` symlink now points to directory `e87…`, the new commit that
Deptool created for this deploy. The previous version is still around for
debugging purposes.

## Adding a systemd unit

So far we’ve been managing files in `/var/lib/deptool/apps`. That’s nice and
self-contained — just dropping files there can’t do damage to the rest of your
system — but it’s also fairly limited. We still need to somehow tell Caddy to
load its configuration from `/var/lib/deptool/apps/caddy/current`, and how do
we manage _that_ configuration?

One answer is to run Caddy under systemd, with a unit much like this one:

```systemd
[Unit]
Description=Caddy webserver
After=network-online.target nss-lookup.target

[Service]
ExecStart=/bin/caddy run --config /var/lib/deptool/apps/caddy/current/Caddyfile
# Other configuration keys omitted here for brevity.

[Install]
WantedBy=multi-user.target
```

We can manage this systemd unit with Deptool as well. If we place it in the
`systemd` subdirectory of the `caddy` app, then Deptool will automatically make
this unit available by creating a symlink to it in `/etc/systemd/system`. That
means systemd knows about this unit, but it doesn’t yet _activate_ it.[^3] We
want Caddy to run, so we also _enable_ the unit by adding the following
`manifest.json`[^4] to the app:

<!-- Pygments highlights `yaml` but not `json` for some reason! -->
```yaml
{
  "systemd": {
    "units_enabled": ["caddy.service"]
  }
}
```

[^3]: Deptool does not automatically activate all available units, because some
      units are not meant to be activated directly. For example, a unit may be
      activated through socket activation instead, or by a timer.

[^4]: The manifest is a json file, and not a yaml or toml file, because in
      larger cluster configurations it’s supposed to be _generated_, not written
      by hand.

Our `prod` directory now looks like this:

    webserver
    └── caddy
        ├── Caddyfile
        ├── manifest.json
        └── systemd
            └── caddy.service

Let’s deploy it:

    $ deptool deploy
    webserver (rollback unavailable)
        update caddy
            + manifest.json
            + systemd/caddy.service
            link unit caddy.service
            enable unit caddy.service

    Rollback unavailable for some hosts.
    Apply to 1 host in cluster 'prod'? [y/N/d]

The plan tells us a few things:

 * We’re going to deploy to host `webserver`, where we modify the `caddy` app.
   Because we’re adding a new systemd unit, rollback is not available.
 * The files `manifest.json` and `systemd/caddy.service` are going to be
   newly created inside the app directory.
 * A symlink to `caddy.service` is going to be placed in `/etc/systemd/system`.
 * The unit `caddy.service` is going to be enabled.

Furthermore, Deptool warns that rollback is not available. This is fine, we’ll
dive into the details of rollback later. Press `y` to accept.

    Apply to 1 host in cluster 'prod'? [y/N/d] y

    webserver:
    ● caddy.service - Caddy webserver
         Loaded: loaded (/etc/systemd/system/caddy.service; enabled; preset: disabled)
         Active: active (running) since Sat 2026-04-18 20:51:02 UTC; 307ms ago
       Main PID: 1040 (caddy)

    Apr 18 20:51:02 webserver caddy[1040]: {"level":"info","ts":1776545462.829505,"msg":"serving initial configuration"}
    Apr 18 20:51:02 webserver caddy[1040]: {"level":"info","ts":1776545462.8388124,"logger":"tls","msg":"cleaning storage unit","storage":"FileStorage:./caddy"}
    Apr 18 20:51:02 webserver caddy[1040]: ...

      webserver: done

    Changes deployed successfully to 1 host in 0.68s.

When an app contains enabled systemd units, Deptool prints the status of the
unit, so you can see that it activated correctly — or when it didn’t, to help
you diagnose why it failed.

## Restarting systemd units

Let’s update our Caddy configuration again, and deploy:

    $ vim prod/webserver/caddy/Caddyfile
    $ deptool deploy
    webserver
        update caddy
            ~ Caddyfile
            restart unit caddy.service

    Auto-rollback if deploy fails.
    Apply to 1 host in cluster 'prod'? [y/N/d]

This time the plan tells us:

 * The `Caddyfile` in the `caddy` app will change. Press `d` to view the diff.
 * The systemd unit `caddy.service` will be restarted.
 * Rollback is available.

The change to Caddyfile is intentional, it’s the change we are trying to deploy.
When a deployment changes an app in any way, Deptool also restarts all of the
systemd units that are listed as enabled in the app’s manifest.[^5] Rollback
means that if `caddy.service` fails to start (for example, because we introduced
a syntax error in the Caddyfile), then Deptool will point the `current` symlink
back at the previous revision again, and restart systemd units once more so they
pick up the previous known-good configuration. This ensures that we don’t leave
`caddy.service` in a failed state, with no webserver running. Let’s accept:

    Apply to 1 host in cluster 'prod'? [y/N/d] y

    webserver:
    ● caddy.service - Caddy webserver
         Loaded: loaded (/etc/systemd/system/caddy.service; enabled; preset: disabled)
         Active: active (running) since Sat 2026-04-18 21:17:48 UTC; 308ms ago
       Main PID: 1174 (caddy)

    Apr 18 21:17:48 webserver caddy[1174]: {"level":"info","ts":1776547068.4650128,"msg":"serving initial configuration"}
    Apr 18 21:17:48 webserver caddy[1174]: {"level":"info","ts":1776547068.468667,"logger":"tls","msg":"storage cleaning happened too recently; skipping for now","storage":"FileStorage:./caddy","instance":"25b86653-5307-42de-a4a7-de691f59428a","try_again":1776633468.4686666,"try_again_in":86399.999999798}
    Apr 18 21:17:48 webserver caddy[1174]: {"level":"info","ts":1776547068.468865,"logger":"tls","msg":"finished cleaning storage units"}
    Apr 18 21:17:48 webserver caddy[1174]: ...

      webserver: done

    Changes deployed successfully to 1 host in 0.72s.

[^5]: While many applications can reload configuration, Deptool opts to keep
      things simple, so it always restarts all affected systemd units.

## Creating symlinks

When we control the configuration files and we write the systemd units, we can
put all the files we need in `/var/lib/deptool/apps`. Sometimes though, we need
to manage files at prescribed locations in the filesystem, and we don’t get to
choose the path. For example, we may need to add files in `/etc/sudoers.d` or
`/etc/tmpfiles.d`. To handle this, Deptool can create symlinks at arbitrary
filesystem locations, that point to files in `/var/lib/deptool`. Let’s add a
tmpfiles entry.

    $ echo 'd /var/lib/caddy 0700 caddy caddy - -' > prod/webserver/caddy/tmpfiles.conf

Next we update `manifest.json` to include a `symlinks` section:

```yaml
{
  "systemd": {
    "units_enabled": ["caddy.service"]
  },
  "symlinks": {
    "/etc/tmpfiles.d/caddy.conf": "tmpfiles.conf"
  }
}
```

Deploy this:

    $ deptool deploy
    webserver (rollback unavailable)
        update caddy
            ~ manifest.json
            + tmpfiles.conf
            link /etc/tmpfiles.d/caddy.conf -> tmpfiles.conf
            restart unit caddy.service

    Rollback unavailable for some hosts.
    Apply to 1 host in cluster 'prod'? [y/N/d]

This time the plan includes the new file `tmpfiles.conf`, and the new symlink
at `/etc/tmpfiles.d/caddy.conf`. This symlink points through `current`:

    root@webserver $ readlink /etc/tmpfiles.d/caddy.conf
    /var/lib/deptool/apps/caddy/current/tmpfiles.conf

This means that if we make another change, the symlink will not change, only the
target file. For example, let’s change the group owner from `caddy` to `www`:

    $ echo 'd /var/lib/caddy 0770 caddy www - -' > prod/webserver/caddy/tmpfiles.conf
    $ deptool deploy
    webserver
        update caddy
            ~ tmpfiles.conf
            restart unit caddy.service

    Auto-rollback if deploy fails.
    Apply to 1 host in cluster 'prod'? [y/N/d]

This time the plan does not mention the `/etc/tmpfiles.d/caddy.conf`, because
it does not need to change. Press `d` to double-check the diff, then `y` to
accept.

If we remove this symlink again from the manifest (in fact, we can remove the
entire `symlinks` section), Deptool will remove the symlink from the host:

    $ rm prod/webserver/caddy/tmpfiles.conf
    $ vim prod/webserver/caddy/manifest.json
    $ deptool deploy
    webserver
        update caddy
            ~ manifest.json
            - tmpfiles.conf
            unlink /etc/tmpfiles.d/caddy.conf
            restart unit caddy.service

    Auto-rollback if deploy fails.
    Apply to 1 host in cluster 'prod'? [y/N/d]

This time the plan says:

 * There was a change to the manifest.
 * The file `tmpfiles.conf` will be removed.
 * The unit `caddy.service` will be restarted, since there is a change to the
   app and Deptool can’t tell that a restart is _not_ needed.
 * The symlink `/etc/tmpfiles.d/caddy.conf` will be removed.

Because Deptool knows exactly which files it manages and what is currently
deployed, it can clean up after itself and delete symlinks that are no longer
included in a new revision of the configuration. As an additional safeguard,
it will only remove symlinks that point into `/var/lib/deptool`.

## Removing the app

To remove an app, simply remove it from the configuration, and Deptool will
remove it from the host.

    $ rm -fr prod/webserver/caddy
    $ deptool deploy
    webserver
        remove caddy
            - Caddyfile
            - manifest.json
            - systemd/caddy.service
            disable unit caddy.service
            unlink unit caddy.service

    Auto-rollback if deploy fails.
    Apply to 1 host in cluster 'prod'? [y/N/d] y

      webserver: done

If we check the host, the app is indeed gone:

    root@webserver $ ls -l /var/lib/deptool/apps
    total 0

    root@webserver $ systemctl status caddy.service
    Unit caddy.service could not be found.

`/var/lib/deptool` does still exist on the host, but it does not interfere with
anything.

## Conclusion

In this tutorial we deployed configuration for a single app on a single host.
The cluster configuration resides in a directory tree, which we can apply
against the cluster with `deptool deploy`. To add more hosts and more apps,
simply create more directories in the configuration directory.
